My
name is Darlene Baker, and I'm a student at A&M. And
I am interviewing Miss Margie Presnell for an oral
history interview in my class, cultural
geography. OK. First question. Were you born
here? And if not, how did you arrive? And why did you
pick this area? I was born and raised here in Brazos
County. And I was born in the southern part of the
county. picked this part because my parents had
always lived here and continued to live here. And
in those days, children did not go away from home to
work. They stayed home and worked with their
families. That's perfect. Go ahead. Is that it?
Why did you stay? Well, we stayed at home with our
parents because in those days, children did not
have the opportunity to take vocational nursing
or anything of that sort in the schools, because I
went to a one-teacher school, and we just didn't
have those kind of opportunities. So we just lived
at home with our parents, all lived in one big happy
family, and all worked together. Okay, I'm going
to stop it right here.
Okay, Ms. Cresno, what other family lines are you
related to in the surrounding area? Well, I have a
sister, the Arnolds, that lives here, and a sister
that is deceased, and her family is still living
here, and they are the Allens.
And I have a nephew, Robert Baker, that has a ranch
out here, the other side of Curtin, and they are
here quite often. Come here quite often. Okay.
Were there any disasters that you remember, such
as floods, storms, or droughts, anything like
that? And Brian? Well, I remember the storm of
1914, which was a terrible storm, and it was very
destructive. And at that time, my daddy was not
working. He was working on a ranch at another
place, and we'd come home over the weekend. And my
mother was always afraid of, winds, you just
couldn't stand them. And I know that storm blew so
hard, it even blew our wagon away from the house. It
took it down across the prairie, and it just tore up
everything. And I was sitting in the bedroom
looking at some pictures, I was just 12 years old,
and things like that didn't excite me. So I was
sitting there looking at those pictures, and Mama
came in and said, Margie, quick, didn't you see
that big tree fall? It almost hit the house. And
says, we're going to the barn. We had just finished
a new log barn. And so I said, you think we ought to
go? She said, yes, we need to go. Says, we've got to
get out of here. So I went out there, and just as I
went in the barn door, the top came off. of the barn
and just barely missed my head. Boy. And so we were,
of course we all had to go back to the house then
because we didn't have any shelter over us. Boy,
that's a miracle. So it was just really a tragic
thing. And Papa came home so upset because
everything was just torn to pieces. And it just
ruined everything around the farm. What kind of
storm was this? Was this a hurricane or something?
Kind of like that. High winds and rain. Yeah, real
strong winds. Yeah, storm of 1914. Yeah, and it
just about tore the place down? Yeah, it sure did.
Was there a lot of damage in Bryan? Now, I wouldn't
know about Brian because, you know, then we didn't
have radios and things of that type, and we lived
out in the country. All righty. Okay. What changes
in technology have you seen, like, you know,
transportation and farming, help irrigation,
advantages in getting to the market? Well,
there's been lots of changes. Now, when we lived on
the farm and worked on the farm, all we had to work
with was mules and walking plows, walking
cultivators, and even oxen. We... We had a pair of
oxen that we drove and plowed. That's really neat.
I think that would be exciting. I would like to try
that. Well, I have done it. I know they were named
Coley and Brown. And Uncle Lewis, he would hollow
wool Coley. And that old oxen knew where to go and
what to do. But nowadays, everything is done by
machinery. That's tractors and machines. hay
balers and hay rakes and all that kind of stuff
where we had to do that by hand. Y'all had to do more
of a lot of hard work. Yeah, we even cut our own corn
tops. We didn't waste anything. Pop had us save
everything. We cut our corn tops and shocked them,
stacked them up in a point like and let them dry and
then take them in to feed the cows in the
wintertime. Y'all must have had a lot of crops,
right? Yeah, we raised practically everything we
ate except the staples. like sugar and flour, and
even ground our own meal. We had a great big, what
they called then, a potato bank that was built out
of logs with dirt over it. And then we'd put straw in
there, inside of it. And it had a door to it. And we
would store cushions, and turnips, and potatoes,
and all that kind of stuff. We killed all of our
meat, and cured our meat, and had our lard. We even
made our syrup. And all that kind of thing. We had to
do that all by hand, except, of course, that we had a
certain mill that squeezed the juice out of the
cane, you know. And it was driven by a mule. Y'all
rode horses, right? Yeah. How far out of Bryan did
y'all live? Well, we just didn't come to Bryan.
When we went, we went to Navasota. We were closer to
Navasota. And we lived about... I guess about six
miles north of Millican. We lived at what you call
the Peach Creek Community. And that's the way that
we did everything. We did it the hard way. But we
enjoyed it. I bet y'all did. That's the only thing
y'all knew. Yeah. The only thing I didn't like to do
whole sweet potatoes. It was really hard. Did
y'all have to get up in the morning real early and
milk the cows? We got up and milked about 15 cows
before we went to school every morning. Y'all must
have got up early. Yeah, had to. Of course, we lived
right near the school. We were lucky to live near
the school. And of course, those days, we had to
take our lunch. Some of us would get up and help Mama
fix, you know, cook the stuff for lunches and
things. And she was always so good to always have
donuts and things of that kind for us to carry. And
she always kept something sweet cooked. And an old
fellow came around with an old Baptist preacher.
And he sold apples. And we traded him butter for
apples. And we kept that. You know how we kept our
butter cold? We had a big dug cistern. And we would
let that butter down, put it in gallon buckets, and
let it down with a rope and leave it in that water so
it would stay cold. Oh, that's neat. We didn't have
refrigerators then. No refrigerators. No. We
didn't have electricity. Yeah. And the job, okay,
advantages in getting to the market, you said by
horse or whatever? Well, the only way you had to go
then was horse and wagon. Right. And nowadays,
people have trucks, have hardtop roads, and have
cars, and it's just all the difference in the
world. Okay. When did you start using modern
appliances? Well, where I lived, after I married,
I lived at the Tabor community. And we didn't have
electricity out there until 1937, when the REA
came out there. They got the REA organized and put
electricity to the rural communities. And that
was the first time we'd had any was in 1937.
1937. That was a long time ago. I bet that was really
exciting, y'all getting that, right? Yeah. I'll
never forget it. They went to town and bought a used
radio, and they played Bing Crosby. Until
midnight, I never got to start singing my life. Oh,
yeah. Well, y'all had photographs? Or, I mean,
what do you call them? Those old record players?
Y'all didn't have that until the electricity came
in? Well, you could have those. You'd wind them up.
Wind them, right. Okay. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
We didn't have any natural gas. And then after we
had electricity, we got the butane gas for cooking
and heating. And those were kind of heaven sent to
us because we lived out in the rural areas where we
had to use coal oil cook stoves. And they had one
fireplace in the house, and you couldn't warm a
house that way. How did y'all heat yourselves? I
mean, keep that place heated? We had that one
fireplace. Did y'all all sleep around that
fireplace? No. Or what? What did y'all do, just
cover it in blankets? Mm-hmm. We just got cold. Oh,
I bet that was uncomfortable. It was.
Next question. What was a normal day like, and what
did you do, and when did you go, and what travel to
various places?
Well, my normal day was pretty hectic sometimes,
because I had several babies and children to take
care of, and had to get up about 5.30 in the morning
or 6, because we had to fix all the lunches for the
children that were in school. And by the way, I had
been, when I married, I had been in school all my
life. I had started school when I was five, and as
soon as I got out of school, I took the teacher's
examination and taught. And that was two years of
college, right? And then I went to college and had
two years. Oh, okay. And then, of course, when I
married, I had a stepson then. He was ready to start
school that year, so therefore I was in school
continuously. So the days were really full. And,
of course, we did everything the hard way. I had to
wash with the tub and rub board and things of that
type, you know, and carry in wood. And just
everything that could be done had to be done
manually. There's no machinery at all to do
anything. A lot of labor put in that. You bet. And it
was hard labor, too. And traveling, we did have
vacations occasionally with my sister, Ms.
Baker, and her husband. Only time we ever went
vacation was when we went with them. We always went
together. Where'd y'all go? Well, we went to the
centennial, the year they had that, at Dallas. And
then we went to San Antonio one summer, and we went
to all those parks and zoos and things of that type.
And then we went to Mineral Wells, because that was
where Mr. Baker, your granddaddy, had lived at one
time. And so we went there one week and spent the
week. And every time we went, well, we went with
them. We went to Galveston and we went to places
like that. Did you ever go far out of state or
anything like that? No, not then we didn't. The
only time I've been out of state was when your
grandmother and I, Ms. Baker, went on that bus tour
about five years ago. And we went all up in Canada
and Alaska. Not Alaska. We didn't go to Alaska. We
went to Canada. And went to New York, went to
Washington, DC, and went through, oh, I don't have
any states. But that's beautiful. Canada's
beautiful. Yeah, and it's so clean. And we just
enjoyed it so much. We were gone three weeks. and
went to Nashville and went to the Grand Ole Opera. I
heard that is really something to see. And went to
the Upper Room. Well, they tell me that the old one
wasn't nothing compared to this new one. You know,
they built a new one and have the opera laying. And
this lady told me just a while ago that it was better
than any Disney World. Oh, really? I'd like to go up
there sometime. That's nice. We're hoping we can
go this spring or this summer. All righty. What
were the designs of the houses like, and how do they
differ from today? They can, you know, know. Put
some of that down.
Well, houses in those, in the old days, were so much
different from ones they are now because most of
them were built with two rooms across the front and
a long front porch or else two rooms and a big
hallway down through the middle and They had no
closets, no storage space, no bathrooms.
And way back there, when you had to take a bath, you
had to bring a wash tub in, heat your water on the
stove, which was a wood stove at that. And we just
didn't have any hot water, any convenience at all.
And now the houses are so different. They are made
all modern. Everything is push buttons now. With
every convenience needed, central air and heat,
Telephones, intercom, and you name it, the new
homes have it. Right, more modernized and
everything. And they're much warmer than the
houses, the old houses, you froze to death in them
because they were so high up off the ground, and the
windows, people didn't know how to build houses in
those days. Did y'all have any fireplaces
upstairs also? No, we just had one upstairs. The
basement, did y'all have any basements? No. No
basement. Huh. And the house set up about two and a
half feet off the ground. I remember the kids used
to play, you know how they used to play with these
little cars? Right. That's where they played,
under the front porch. Underneath the front
porch, right. So they had to get where there was
some dirt, because we had grass on the yard. These
houses have a lot of, were they more, had columns in
the front, or what? Some of them did, yeah. Some of
them did, or more like that? Yeah. All wooded?
Yeah, all wooded. All wooded, and high seeding.
Yeah. They were high seeding? Yeah, they really
were. They said that made them cooler in the
summer. It also made them cooler in the winter.
That's right. Okay.
What schooling did you have, and how does it differ
from today? Well, the school I went to was a
one-teacher school, and we didn't have any bus
system or anything in those days, and we were
fortunate enough to live close to the school. It
was just right outside of our Pasture Gate, we just
lived right at it. I guess it wasn't a mile even. The
school? To the school. Well, that's good. And we
just had a one-teacher school and went through the
seventh grade at that time. But then later, we
built a two-teacher school in the community, and
it went through the eighth grade. And so I worked
hard, and I studied at home and everything to...
learned enough that I could pass a teacher's exam.
In those days, you could go for the county board and
take a teacher's examination and get your
certificate. And that's the way I taught, was I got
me a certificate that way. And then I went to
college two years after I started teaching. I
saved my money and went. Each year I'd go to
college. And
it is It's very different today, because children
have so many advantages going to school. Right.
They can carpool. They can carpool, or in
countries, they own the bus line, maybe. Right,
get a bus. Do y'all ride horses? Education is one of
the best things you need in life. OK. What was it
like during the Depression?
Well, the Depression caused lots of hardships on
people. People that had automobiles and trucks
and depended on them for a living, they couldn't
get any tires. Maybe when they needed them, the
gasoline was rationed, and they couldn't get
enough gasoline to carry on their business. And
the flour and sugar. And different kinds of food
were rationed. You had to have ration stamps for
many items, you know. And if you used up your ration
stamps, you just had to do it out until your next
ones come out. And the gasoline was rationed. And I
know sugar was rationed. And you could just get so
much sugar a month. That's all you could get. I can
imagine. Big family, too, especially going
through that. And I'm sure... There was lots of
hardships during the Depression that I don't
recall because
You know, it's just... I remember my mother
telling me that there was a lot of people
committing suicide, like the stock markets
dropping and everything like that, and standing
in the soup line. Yeah, there's lots of people had
to do that. A lot of people were really hitting it
hard. Yeah, they really had it hard, and lots of
them were out of work. There was no work for them to
do. That was terrible. It really was a tragic thing
for our country to have to go through, I'll tell
you, and We were blessed, I guess, in lots of ways.
Right. Y'all must have gotten hit so hard. All
right. Tell us about your codes for raising your
family, and how does it differ from today's
standards?
Well, I raised six children, five boys, one girl.
Times were quite different at first. They went to a
rural school through the 10th grade, then to Bryan
High to finish. And later, our rural school was
closed, and they all were bused into Bryan. My
family all had their chores to do each
evening. They were also involved in 4-H projects,
which kept them busy. I had an understanding with
my children. No matter what came up, I was always
there to listen and help them with their problems.
I always worked with my children. I found that you
could lead better than drive. Of course, we didn't
have the problems of today. So many cars, dope, and
good highways, which make it impossible for them
to get around to so many places.
My family grew up knowing college was
automatically a part of their schooling. I had
four boys graduate from A&M.
One is a lawyer, one an aeronautical engineer, One
is state representative, and one works for the
State Department of Agriculture. He graduated
from Sam Houston State College. My daughter
married an Aggie graduate. How many daughters do
you have? I just had one. One daughter. And he is
president of the Hygiene Milk Company in
Harlingen, Texas. Boy, all your sons graduated
from A&M, right? All of them but Danny. Danny
graduated from Sam Houston. I see. All righty. All
of them went into the service except one. Al, they
declared a holiday just about a month before he was
to leave. Drafted. I see. All right. What was your
first job? One of my boys I left out. He's a
veterinary doctor. He must have graduated from
A&M, right? Yeah, he graduated from A&M, went in
service, stayed seven and a half years, came back
and went back to A&M and graduated as a veterinary
doctor. That's good. They get good jobs. He has his
own clinic. That's really good. That was him that
just left. And he's a veterinarian? Mm-hmm. Oh,
okay. Okay, what was your first job in the
community, and what was it like? Well, the first
job I had was I was a teacher. I taught up through the
fifth grade in the two-teacher school there at
Peace Creek where I was raised. Uh-huh. I loved it.
I loved teaching. It was just something that was
just challenging to you. So I taught the first year
there. Then I went to Tabor, and I taught two years
out there. And that's where I met my husband and
married. And then I never did get to teach anymore
because I did not have a degree. And I never did get
to go back to school anymore. But that was my job
then, and then I also Worked with 4-H for about 25
years. Adult leader. And was camp director for
several years. Also had held offices in the church
and in the women's society. And I have been a member
of the local church board, Alexander Methodist
Church, for about 20 years. And where I still go to
church. I drive from Bryan out there when I go to
church. Oh, that's nice.
And I enjoyed it a lot. So you only really taught
school for three years? Three years. And what
grade level was this? Do you know? First year, I
taught through the fifth. Next year, I taught
through the seventh. All the grades in a
one-teacher school out there close to table. It
wasn't the table school. Then the next year, I
taught in a table school, which was five teachers,
and I taught... the 5th, 6th, and 7th grades. Did
you teach all subjects? I mean, were you just,
okay, this is where, okay, you taught arithmetic
and whatever. Yes, just taught all of them. Oh,
okay. That's the way teachers had to do those days.
Right, those days. Nowadays it's different.
That's right. We sure are different. Okay. Was
Brian affected by the energy crisis at all?
yes i'm sure brian was affected quite seriously
with the energy crisis because we didn't have
enough gas for transportation not enough fuel for
machinery and to run the different plants that
they run by fuel and we had to consume our
electricity that is we had to keep the temperature
down turn off the lights and and things of that
kind. And in the homes and businesses, they had to
keep the temperature real low to conserve the
electricity and all. And the energy crisis was
just really a serious thing because so many people
just never thought about what it really meant to be
without it. They just never had been. Never been.
And they just thought that, oh, well, it's there.
We got it. Right. They just couldn't realize that
someday that it wouldn't be there. I know. That
would have been a casualty for sure. Yeah. But I
think it's affected everybody. It has. It sure
has. All right. Has crime increased or decreased
any? And has it affected you any? Well, I think
crime is on the increase.
Of course, we have more people now than we used to
have. And we hear a lot more about it. It's
publicized more. And people are able to get around
more than they used to be. We used to have these
hardtop highways and freeways. and
farm-to-market roads and things like that, and
they have good cars. Anybody can commit a crime in
Brown and be in Houston in a couple hours and be out
of the reach of officers. Because back in your day,
we didn't have that. And in our days, we didn't have
that kind of stuff. We just didn't know anything
about it. And we have so much dope that's peddled.
and everything till it just makes life more
miserable, I think. Right. Did y'all have any
horse stealing back in y'all's day? Well, we could
have had. I don't remember any. Cattle hustling?
Well, I'm sure we had cattle hustling. But I don't
know. Where we lived, it was more of a community of
people just all worked together. Right. Y'all
didn't even have to lock your doors at night, did
you? No, we never knew what it was to lock a door.
Yeah, today you have to. And we ran off from any home
we didn't lock our doors. Right. And if one person
got into trouble that is needing some work done,
got sick or something, all the community went and
worked his crop out for him. Well, that's really
great. If he's building a barn, they built a barn
for him. And people just worked more in harmony
then than they did now. They were more together.
Yeah, more together. And more involved. That's
right. Most people now don't want to get involved
with anything. No, you're right there. They sure
were. Well, has crime infected you any? No, the
extent of just worrying, I think, is the only
thing. You can't help but worry about youngsters.
And I do have a bunch of young grandsons that are out
at night and times like that and going to school and
things. And that way, it helps. afraid something
will happen to them, and that's about the only way
it's affected me, because I keep my doors locked,
and I'm in before night, and I don't get out after
night unless I'm with some of the boys, or they come
by to pick me up, take me somewhere. Have you had any
bad casualties with your family? Well, yes, we had
one terrible bad casualty. It is in 1918. At least I
thought it was bad. It wasn't a fatal casualty, but
my older brother had gone to the army. And he'd come
home for Christmas holidays. And in the meantime,
after he had left, we had built up a walk and we had
fixed the brick along the side of it and this walk
went out to this underground cistern and he didn't
know it was there so the next morning he thought oh I
think I'll just he told my sisters I think I'll just
wake them all up with a Christmas gun so he took the
shotgun out and raised it up to shoot it and he
stumbled on one of these bricks and when he did he
fell and naturally he stuck his hand out to catch
himself and it blew all his hand off and he's lived
with one hand all his life and then another one was
my nephew my oldest sister's son was fixing to
cross the railroad track here in Bryan and it was a A
place where you couldn't see the train coming or
anything. There was a lot of blockage there. And
the garage sat right beside the track. And he
started up on it. And as he did, the train hit him,
hit the car. And it was weeks. We just didn't know
whether he'd live or not. Oh, that's true. But I
think prayers were some of the things saved him.
The doctors gave him up. How bad off? I mean, was he
really... He's fine now. Fine now. I mean, was he in
intensive care when this happened? Well, then
they didn't have intensive care. Oh, that's
right. But he spent a long time ago there, so he
married. And he has been teaching in the Air Force
for years and years, ever since he graduated from
A&M. And he's just doing fine. He's going to retire
and come back here this year. And we'll be happy to
have him home. Well, that's great.
Let's stop here.
Let's see. What do you think of the fashions today
and how they affect you? Well, the way they affect
me is that I can't find any dresses because they
make them all short and so tight that women of our
age just can't find the clothes that are suitable
for us. And I do think that, of course, they are
getting away from the real, real short ones.
Shorts that's going down. Like they used to have,
but I think they're kind of tacky the way they're
getting them down three or four inches below the
knees.